Title: Jupiters moon Europa may have less oxygen than expected, a finding that might put a damper on life
This image provided by NASA, processed by Kevin M. Gill, shows Jupiters moon Europa captured by the Juno spacecraft on Sept. 29, 2022, with north to the left. Research published Monday, March 4, 2024, suggests theres less oxygen on the icy surface of Jupiters moon Europa than thought  and that could affect what if any life might be lurking in the moons underground ocean. (Kevin M. Gill/NASA/JPL-Caltech/SwRI via AP)
CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. (AP)  New research suggests theres less oxygen on the icy surface of Jupiters moon Europa than thought  and that could affect what if any life might be lurking in the moons underground ocean.
Even with little or no oxygen, microbes might still be bustling around in the ocean believed to exist miles (kilometers) beneath Europas frozen crust. As for what else, who knows, said NASA scientist Kevin Hand, who was not involved in the study published Monday in Nature Astronomy.
More work is needed to confirm these findings, which are contrary to earlier telescope observations of condensed oxygen in Europas ice, indicating a higher oxygen concentration, said Hand. 
The new study is based on data collected by NASAs Juno spacecraft during a particularly close flyby of Europa in 2022  a distance of just 219 miles (353 kilometers).
A U.S.-European team calculated that between 13 pounds and 39 pounds (6 kilograms and 18 kilograms) of oxygen are produced every second at Europas surface. 
Previous estimates had a much wider spread, with as much as 2,245 pounds (1,100 kilograms) of oxygen produced per second. So unless Europas oxygen production was significantly higher in the past, the new measurements provide a narrower range to support habitability, the researchers wrote.
This oxygen is formed, along with hydrogen, as Jupiters radiation blasts Europas global shell of frozen water. 


Lead author James Szalay of Princeton University said Junos flyby was the first time a spacecraft directly sniffed Europas surroundings. We couldnt wait to peek behind the curtain of its complex environment, he said in an email.
While its a significantly narrower range than we previously thought, theres still a lot we can learn, Szalay said. 
Its unknown how much oxygen escapes into the moons atmosphere, how much remains in the ice and how much might find its way to the subterranean sea.
NASA plans to launch the Europa Clipper this fall. The spacecraft will make dozens of close flybys of Europa  nearly the size of our moon  while orbiting the giant gas planet.
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institutes Science and Educational Media Group. The AP is solely responsible for all content.
Copyright 2024 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved.
